[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: One of the
[Amit Varma]: great dilemmas of politics is the question of when a politician finally comes to power,
[Amit Varma]: does his focus shift to governance, or does it stay with politics? Does he try to do a
[Amit Varma]: good job running the country, or does he simply focus on what will get him re-elected? In
[Amit Varma]: an ideal democracy, you might imagine that this is a false choice. Surely a politician
[Amit Varma]: in power has to provide good governance to stay in office, right? Well, not in our democracy,
[Amit Varma]: where there is so little connect between power and accountability. Firstly, many good governance
[Amit Varma]: decisions will show results many years down the road, well beyond the electoral horizon,
[Amit Varma]: and the politician has no incentive to make them now. The deeper structural changes, with
[Amit Varma]: their delayed and invisible benefits, for which no one man will get credit, will not
[Amit Varma]: attract the politician, but the immediate sops or handouts, which look good but perpetuate
[Amit Varma]: the problem, will be more attractive to him. Secondly, we live in an age where narrative
[Amit Varma]: is all-powerful. We all live in a world inside our heads that often bears no connection to
[Amit Varma]: the real world outside it. This is enabled and amplified by social media. The most important
[Amit Varma]: skill for a politician, therefore, is to shape these narratives and not change the world.
[Amit Varma]: And that is why it is no surprise that a politician as skilled as Narendra Modi cares more about
[Amit Varma]: optics than about governance. One example of this, the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. The Swachh Bharat Abhiyan sounds amazing, but it's a
[Amit Varma]: classic example of a government scheme whose intentions are noble, but whose outcomes are
[Amit Varma]: small. To explain why this is so, I have as a guest on this episode, Shruti Rajgopalan,
[Amit Varma]: a constitutional economist who teaches economics at Purchase College in New York and who has
[Amit Varma]: been an old friend and a frequent guest on this show. I recorded this episode a few weeks
[Amit Varma]: ago when I was experimenting with this new format of chatting a little bit with my guests
[Amit Varma]: about themselves before we got to the subject at hand. I've since stopped this practice
[Amit Varma]: because listeners gave me feedback that they preferred it if we just got to the point.
[Amit Varma]: But still, this is one of those old recordings from that phase. I enjoyed our entire conversation.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more. Check out the ones from IVM Podcast who co-produced the show with me. Go to ivmpodcast.com
[Amit Varma]: or download the IVM app and you'll find a host of great Indian podcasts that cover every
[Amit Varma]: subject you could think of. From the magazine I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com, there
[Amit Varma]: is the Pragati podcast hosted by Hamsini Hariharan and Pawan Srinath. There is a brilliant Hindi
[Amit Varma]: podcast Hulia Bhaazi hosted by Pranay Koteswani and Saurabh Chandra. And apart from these
[Amit Varma]: policy podcasts, IVM has shows that cover music, films, finance, sports, sci-fi, tech
[Amit Varma]: and the LGBT community all under one roof or rather all in one app. So download the
[Amit Varma]: IVM podcast app today. Shruti, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Hi, Amit. It's great
[Amit Varma]: to be here. Shruti, by now you're familiar with the custom on the show that I start off
[Amit Varma]: by asking the guest some questions about themselves so that listeners can get to know them better.
[Amit Varma]: And last time when we spoke to you, you spoke about your love for economics and law and
[Amit Varma]: what drew you to becoming an economist. And I want to sort of ask what is a follow up
[Amit Varma]: question to that, which is that, you know, I've known you for over 10 years. And one
[Amit Varma]: thing that is safe to say, and that will be obvious to listeners who've heard your previous
[Amit Varma]: episodes is that economics is not just a profession for you or something that you've studied.
[Amit Varma]: You are deeply passionately in love with economics the way some people are with say football.
[Amit Varma]: So was there a specific moment or an aha moment in your life, where things changed for you,
[Amit Varma]: you looked at the world differently because of economics and realized that this was what
[Guest]: you wanted to do? I think I, you know, if I had to have one aha moment, I had a fantastic
[Guest]: professor in DU in my second year. His name is now he's retired. He's Professor Anil Kukradi.
[Guest]: And just like, you know, one of the kindest people I know, and just a really remarkable
[Guest]: teacher. And for the first time, I remember in his class for me, like the world kind of
[Guest]: came into sharp focus. You know how when you wear glasses, and you go to the eye doctor,
[Guest]: they they keep putting different lenses on you. And it's all hazy and bright. And then
[Guest]: suddenly the world comes into focus and you can read those letters. So that sort of happened
[Guest]: to me when I was a student at DU. He was just an incredible professor. The other part of
[Guest]: it was just reading. You know, I loved economics so much. I read broadly, I read well outside
[Guest]: the curriculum, the DU curriculum was quite sad. So I read a lot. And I think we underestimate
[Guest]: how important simple economic texts are. So Henry Hazlitt and his economics in one lesson
[Guest]: made a big impression. Right? Similarly, Thomas Sowell's work has made a huge impact in how
[Guest]: I think about the world. Frederick Bastiat would be another example, you know, just people
[Guest]: who write complex economic concepts in a simple and very enjoyable way. And slowly I started
[Guest]: seeing economics and everything. The other thing is I'm trained at George Mason, which
[Guest]: is a particular tradition in economics, you know, in terms of public choice, Austrian
[Guest]: economics and things like that. But one thing at George Mason, I don't know if it's in the
[Guest]: water or the air. Everyone just lives and breeds economics in that department. We see
[Guest]: economics in everything, right from marriage markets to betting markets to political markets.
[Guest]: Everything is an incentive analysis. So I, I guess I found my people. And this is what
[Guest]: I discussed all the way through grad school. And after a point, you know, when you do something
[Guest]: enough, when you read enough, it just becomes a way of thinking. And people who are close
[Guest]: to me, my friends, my family, they often make fun of me that I just sort of see economics
[Guest]: and everything. But I don't know if it's a switch that I can turn off now. I think I
[Guest]: think it's been switched on and might stay like this for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I mean, economics is a study of human behavior. So economics is in everything, except
[Amit Varma]: maybe outer space. But so if an enthusiastic listener of these episodes was to ask that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, economics sounds very interesting. And the economic way of looking at the world is
[Amit Varma]: something that, you know, I want to understand better. And can you recommend, say, three
[Amit Varma]: books or five books, which can help me do that? Like, what are those three books I should
[Amit Varma]: take with me to a holiday resort and lock myself up with and I'll come out a different
[Amit Varma]: person looking at the world through clear lenses? What would you recommend?
[Guest]: So I would definitely recommend economics in one lesson by Henry Hazlitt, like that
[Guest]: is a beginner's textbook, I think anybody can read it, it doesn't matter whether you've
[Guest]: had any background in economics or social sciences before this, that would be a good
[Guest]: place to start saying pick up any book by Thomas Sowell.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'll interject here and point out that economics in one lesson by Henry Hazlitt,
[Amit Varma]: one of my favorite books as well is based on an essay by Frederick Bastia inspired by
[Amit Varma]: an essay by Frederick Bastia called that which is seen and that which is not seen, which
[Amit Varma]: is unseen, which is also the inspiration for this podcast, because that magnificent essay
[Amit Varma]: and it's free online. So just do a Google search that which is seen and that which is
[Guest]: not seen. And yes, sort of talks about
[Guest]: I don't want to reduce economics only to incentive analysis and the analysis of unintended consequences.
[Guest]: Absolutely. But I do think economics is very powerful compared to any other discipline
[Guest]: in pointing out what are these unintended or unseen effects. And I don't think any other
[Guest]: discipline comes close. It's like having a superpower, you know. So I really strongly
[Guest]: urge everyone to read both Frederick Bastia, the essay that, you know, Amit mentioned,
[Guest]: and after which the podcast is named, and also Henry Hazlitt's book.
[Amit Varma]: Great. And moving on from there, you were mentioning Thomas Sowell.
[Guest]: Yeah, I would say pick up anything by Thomas Sowell. He's great. He's sort of like, I think
[Guest]: the core of good economic ideas is there in pretty much anything he writes. But he's also
[Guest]: someone who's able to see the big picture very clearly. So there's a lot of politics,
[Guest]: there's a lot of culture, there's a lot of history included in how he sees things and
[Guest]: the way he writes. He writes beautifully. So I would definitely recommend him. If you're
[Guest]: not much into reading, and you know, you like videos or interviews and podcasts and things
[Guest]: like that, I would say Amit's podcast is a good place to start. Econ Talk, which Russ
[Guest]: Roberts does is a great place to start. Yeah, Marginal Revolution University, these are
[Guest]: former professors of mine at George Mason, Tyler Cowen and Alex Tabarrok, who really
[Guest]: don't need any preface or introduction. They do some fantastic videos, their book is really
[Guest]: good. I use their textbook to teach. So these would be like the principles level things.
[Guest]: I would also say, you know, reading a couple of great essays, I think the use of knowledge
[Guest]: in society by Hayek is one of the finest essays I have read on really understanding how the
[Guest]: market system works. Same thing, you know, James Buchanan wrote a fantastic essay called
[Guest]: politics without romance, and introduction to public choice and constitutional economics.
[Guest]: And I can provide links for both of them, Amit, and you can just put them up. Those
[Amit Varma]: are really good sources. We'll have them at the bottom of this episode. In fact, the use
[Amit Varma]: of knowledge in society, in my opinion, is what I keep telling people is one of the two
[Amit Varma]: great essays of the 20th century. Now, let's see how you know, I must agree. Can you guess
[Amit Varma]: which is the other one on my list? The Candlemakers petition? No, 20th century, 20th century, 20th
[Amit Varma]: century. The other one has nothing to do with economics. So I must tell you, but you'll
[Guest]: say aha when I tell you. Yeah, but I'm so one dimensional. I don't know if I know things
[Amit Varma]: outside of economics that you read. You read so broadly. You don't know me at all. It's
[Amit Varma]: politics in the English language by George Orwell. Oh, of course, you've sent it to me.
[Amit Varma]: That's true. That's a fantastic essay. That's a remarkable essay. And both of those, by
[Amit Varma]: the way, on the site, I edit Pragati at thinkpragati.com. We have a section called Historia, where every
[Amit Varma]: month we put up one historic essay, which in over the past months has included the use
[Amit Varma]: of knowledge in society by Hayek, which is such a masterpiece of an essay, politics in
[Amit Varma]: the English language by George Orwell and the essay by B.R. Ambedkar that moved you
[Amit Varma]: so much and that you referred to in our episode about caste, which is when I decided to look
[Amit Varma]: it up because to my shame, I hadn't read that yet. And then we put it up on the site. So
[Guest]: do check out. You know, I just think Ambedkar is one of the, one of the best communicators
[Guest]: I have read. I'm a really big fan of Ambedkar. Our economics and politics don't always align,
[Guest]: but I have never come away from reading Ambedkar without learning anything. And I think he's
[Guest]: the most underappreciated of our framers when it comes to actually reading what he's written,
[Guest]: like he's there in every statue at every street corner. But I do think we need just Ambedkar
[Amit Varma]: to be widely read. So let me ask you a question this time for my own edification rather than
[Amit Varma]: my listeners, which is a genuine question I have, which is that Ambedkar's body of work
[Amit Varma]: is just immense and varied. And it's very common for people to say that you can, if
[Amit Varma]: you read all of his work, you can find justifications for anything in some part of his work or the
[Amit Varma]: other because, you know, he's changed his mind many times. He's gone over so many subjects.
[Amit Varma]: But if someone wants a good rigorous introduction to Ambedkar, where should he start? What should
[Amit Varma]: he read?
[Guest]: I would actually, you know, Ambedkar has this phenomenal ability to write short essays,
[Guest]: letters, give speeches, right? So there are these volumes, it's called Ambedkar writes
[Guest]: and Ambedkar speaks. They are very massive volumes. They were edited by Narendra Jadhav.
[Guest]: But if you just pick up a single essay on the monetary system, it's only three pages
[Guest]: and immensely accessible and readable, right? So I strongly recommend people just Google
[Guest]: Ambedkar's essay on whatever issue they are interested in, whether it's caste, whether
[Guest]: it's taxes, whether it's the Sedition Act, you know, just Google what he's written and
[Guest]: just start reading. I often say this to people that I think Ambedkar would have been fantastic
[Guest]: on Twitter. You know, he came up with like really powerful punchlines, which he delivered
[Guest]: so well when he was giving speeches. So I really miss Ambedkar in present day, not just
[Guest]: because he's such a towering and important figure, but I think his communication skills
[Guest]: were so fantastic, he would have been great on Twitter. So I think just pick up, just
[Guest]: Google Ambedkar's speeches and just start reading Ambedkar in Parliament.
[Amit Varma]: I'm already fantasizing about Ambedkar coming as a guest on the scene in the unseen, but
[Guest]: moving on.
[Guest]: You know, one of my favorite Ambedkar quotes is the caste system is not just the division
[Guest]: of labor, it's a division of laborers. Can you think of a better way to think about the
[Amit Varma]: caste system?
[Amit Varma]: Superbly Pithi.
[Guest]: Right? So he's just such a fantastic communicator. I just wish, you know, I know people read
[Guest]: the 2500 volumes of Gandhi's letters. And you know, I mean, kudos to them. I'm happy
[Guest]: those things are read. But I still think Ambedkar is just under read and underappreciated as
[Guest]: a thinker, you know, not as a political figure or someone who unified the various castes
[Guest]: and who was important in framing the democracy just as an intellectual, a homegrown Indian
[Guest]: intellectual, I think he's very underappreciated.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. Let's, let's move on now to the subject of this episode, which is something
[Amit Varma]: which would have interested Ambedkar. And I wonder what he would have thought of what's
[Amit Varma]: going on in the country right now. And the subject is a government scheme was started
[Amit Varma]: with the very best of intentions, this Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, of which the scene effect
[Amit Varma]: as a government keeps tom tomming, of course, is that we have built x number of toilets
[Amit Varma]: and you know, look what we've and so on and so forth. Tell us a little bit and you've
[Amit Varma]: written on this yourself in your column in Live Mint, in Mint. And tell us a little bit
[Amit Varma]: more about your feelings about the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan.
[Guest]: So you know, public sanitation is incredibly important in modern civilization, right? No
[Guest]: question about that. We have very low levels of public health and sanitation in the rural
[Guest]: areas. And these have terrible consequences, right? So we have high infant mortality, because
[Guest]: you know, little kids, babies get sick, because the water is polluted or the air is polluted.
[Guest]: If they get diarrhea, they're not able to survive. So there are some really important
[Guest]: and terrible consequences for society in terms of not having a good framework for public
[Guest]: health and sanitation. So to that end, I really think it's incredible that this government
[Guest]: has taken on a big initiative and said we really need to pay attention and devote resources
[Guest]: and political capital towards cleaning India, right? So I can very much get behind the general
[Guest]: message of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. I think it's very important. And I don't think it
[Guest]: should be just these four years and you know, Gandhi's 150th birthday. I think we need a
[Guest]: Swachh Bharat for all times to come.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. And and Shruti in your piece, which is again linked from the bottom of this
[Amit Varma]: episode is a piece titled, India needs sewage systems, not free toilets. And in your piece,
[Amit Varma]: you say quote, overall, this which is a Swachh Bharat Abhiyan seems like a well intentioned
[Amit Varma]: and sensible initiative, except for one thing, unquote. So now, elaborate sort of on what
[Amit Varma]: that one thing is.
[Guest]: Yeah. So if you think about what is the end goal to be achieved, if the end goal to be
[Guest]: achieved is to eliminate open defecation, genuinely have, you know, better public sanitation,
[Guest]: I don't think the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan in its current form is going to actually achieve
[Guest]: that goal. If the end goal is that toilets need to be distributed to every household,
[Guest]: I think that goal will be achieved. Right. So let me unpack that a little bit more for
[Guest]: you. Now, what do you really need to eliminate open defecation? So India has one of the highest
[Guest]: levels of open defecation anywhere in the world. In rural areas, it's higher than 65
[Guest]: percent, or at least it was when the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan started. In urban areas, it's
[Guest]: in, you know, about 20 to 30 percent range. And what we mean by open defecation is people
[Guest]: just go out and do their business in the open. Now, you live in Mumbai, so you must have
[Guest]: seen people squatting next to the train lines in the morning. Right. This is a very prevalent
[Guest]: site in urban India. In rural India, they go into, you know, farmland and things like
[Guest]: that. And this is a very big problem because it's difficult to clean up in cultures that
[Guest]: have a lot of open defecation. All the diseases that small babies, women, actually pretty
[Guest]: much people of any age have happens because the basic water system is polluted. And that
[Guest]: is because all this, you know, excreta has not been treated because it's open defecation.
[Guest]: So this is a very fundamental problem. It has massive health and productivity consequences.
[Guest]: It has very large emotional consequences because it is terrible. I mean, every infant that
[Guest]: can be saved should be saved. And the levels of infant mortality we have in UP and Bihar
[Guest]: and things like that are quite, quite terrible and embarrassing in the modern world. So this
[Guest]: has very deep, important consequences for India. Now, how do you solve for this? How
[Guest]: does anyone solve for this? One way of solving for this is we build waste management systems.
[Guest]: And you know, you and I have had lots of conversations about what is the role of government, you
[Guest]: know, what should government do in society at the local, state, federal level and so
[Guest]: on. And I think one really important public good that the government must provide is a
[Guest]: good waste management system. It is very costly, difficult and problematic for every household
[Guest]: to have its own waste management system. Frankly, it's also quite like, you know, unappealing
[Guest]: and a little bit disgusting. So the role of government should be to design waste management
[Guest]: systems where all you need to do is every household is plugged into that system. Right.
[Guest]: So in urban areas, this can be a functional sewage system. Right. In rural areas, it could
[Guest]: be something on a smaller scale. It might be difficult to build large scale sewage systems
[Guest]: because hamlets might be far apart. But you can still have some kind of a simpler version
[Guest]: of a sewage system with, you know, an end area where you collect the refuse in a septic
[Guest]: tank or take it to another location before you treat it and so on. And this service has
[Guest]: not been provided, not just by this government, but any government in the past. So your larger
[Amit Varma]: point is that, look, it seems natural that people are doing open defecation. And it seems
[Amit Varma]: natural that, hey, if you build toilets, they'll have toilets to go to. They'll go there. But
[Amit Varma]: then the point is, once they do their business inside the toilet, what happens then? What
[Guest]: happens to the waste as it were? And that is what you need to build. Exactly. So now
[Guest]: the way I think about this Swachh Bharat Abhiyan is it's a good initiative. But what it's doing
[Guest]: is it's solving the last mile problem. Right. My point of view is, if we had functional
[Guest]: sewage systems in urban areas and waste management systems in rural areas, it is actually not
[Guest]: that expensive to construct a toilet or a latrine. In fact, the last mile problem would
[Guest]: take care of itself. Exactly. So India is already at a level of development where most
[Guest]: people don't need a toilet subsidy if there is a waste management system that they can
[Guest]: easily access. Right. And yes, there might be 20 percent of the people who still need
[Guest]: a toilet subsidy. And I think at that stage, I would very much encourage any government,
[Guest]: state, federal, local to, you know, help build subsidized toilets and so on. But right now,
[Guest]: we are actually creating a new kind of problem. OK, and it's funny. We were talking about
[Guest]: Ambedkar just a few moments ago. So now India has deep persistence of the caste system.
[Guest]: Right. One very important part of the caste system is ritual purity and what certain castes
[Guest]: consider polluting behavior and so on and so forth. Right. Many of the historically
[Guest]: oppressed castes were oppressed either into doing all these distasteful jobs or were oppressed
[Guest]: because they took on these jobs. Right. So the lowest caste in society, in fact, these
[Guest]: are castes that weren't even allowed to live in the village system. They were outcasts
[Guest]: to see what is now called manual scavenging. Right. They were manual scavengers. What they
[Guest]: would do is there would be an outhouse at the back where people did their business and
[Guest]: it would be collected and these people would not even be allowed to enter the house. They
[Guest]: would just come from the back. They would pick up all the human refuse and they would
[Guest]: take it literally like carry a tank or a basket on the head and go to the next house. Right.
[Guest]: Now, you can imagine how terrible it is to have a profession dedicated to having to carry
[Guest]: someone else's feces in your hands. Right. And now you can also imagine that in a culture
[Guest]: which is so obsessed with the caste system and ritual purity, how groups would treat
[Guest]: people who actually engage in this activity as as a form of livelihood. Manual scavengers
[Guest]: were treated abominably in India. Right. And the system came about simply because there
[Guest]: was no other waste management system. So now, if you think about the long term consequences
[Guest]: of having only a latrine in the house and not a waste management system, what we're
[Guest]: doing is we're bringing back manual scavenging. It's actually coming back. So now there are
[Guest]: two types of consequences of having toilets, but no waste management system. One consequence
[Guest]: is people are just using those toilets as storage units or, you know, to keep your provisions
[Guest]: or wash your clothes or something. And they actually still do their business out in the
[Guest]: open. Right. So toilets are there, but open defecation hasn't reduced. The other group
[Guest]: is they do decide to use the latrine or the toilet that has been built by the government,
[Guest]: but they don't want to touch anything to do with their own feces. So now what happens
[Guest]: is you perpetuate the caste system by bringing back manual scavenging, which, by the way,
[Guest]: was abolished many decades ago in India. So that is one of the unintended or the unseen
[Guest]: consequences of building toilets without building sewage systems. What people really want. So
[Guest]: you. OK, so let me put this in perspective. In an ideal world, you want people not to
[Guest]: have all these ridiculous ideas about ritual purity. You want people to make use of latrines.
[Guest]: You want people not to openly defecate. OK, that's the ideal world. We don't live in the
[Guest]: ideal world. We live in a deeply. Backward society from the point of view of caste. Right.
[Guest]: And it is so persistent and it is impossible to break down overnight. People who have these
[Guest]: kinds of values about ritual purity, though I don't subscribe or endorse any of them,
[Guest]: they would actually use the latrine or the toilet that was built at home. Were it connected
[Guest]: to a sewage system where you could just flush the refuse away? Right. And that system we
[Guest]: don't have right now. And until we get that system, you're going to have lots of toilets,
[Guest]: but you're not going to solve the public health and sanitation problem. And if you do manage
[Guest]: to solve the public health and sanitation problem a little bit, you're going to have
[Guest]: a whole class of workers who are oppressed once again because of manual scavenging. In
[Amit Varma]: fact, you know, that's a very unintuitive conclusion in the sense that a sewage system
[Amit Varma]: is not just something that will help with hygiene and public health, but it will also
[Guest]: help in eliminating the caste system. It really would. In some small way. In some small way.
[Guest]: And at the very least, even if it doesn't eliminate it, at least it won't perpetuate
[Guest]: it. Right. Right. We really have to worry about, and especially at the rural level,
[Guest]: you know, in places like UP and Bihar, where the caste system is very persistent, open
[Guest]: defecation is very persistent, and you have very low levels of, you know, economic growth.
[Amit Varma]: This is the trifecta for caste oppression. Right. And we'll take a slight literary digression
[Amit Varma]: here. Have you heard of Pablo Neruda, the poet from Chile? Yes. Yeah. So there is a
[Amit Varma]: story of Neruda and you mentioned, you know, outhouses and how these scavengers were looked
[Amit Varma]: upon as almost subhuman in a sense. And there is a story of how when Neruda was a young
[Amit Varma]: man in his 20s, and is related by Neruda himself in his autobiography, if I remember correctly.
[Amit Varma]: And Neruda was posted to Sri Lanka as some sort of ambassadorial kind of, you know, some
[Amit Varma]: part of their foreign office or whatever. And he lived in a house which had an outhouse
[Amit Varma]: at the back for doing the business. And he was curious about how every day I do my business,
[Amit Varma]: but when I come the next morning, it's pick and span, it's clean. So one day he decided
[Amit Varma]: to find out. And he saw this dark skinned lady walking up taking his refuse and just
[Amit Varma]: going away. And for some reason, being of a poetic temperament or whatever, he fell
[Amit Varma]: in love or rather one should say he fell in lust with her. And he waited like that for
[Amit Varma]: three, four days, and she would come at the crack of dawn, take away his business as it
[Amit Varma]: were, and just go away. And then one day, he just held her by the hand, took her inside
[Amit Varma]: to his bedroom, and he had sex with her. And it was obviously rape, because he described
[Amit Varma]: how she just lay inert with no expression on her face and not even resisting, which
[Amit Varma]: kind of tells you about a the power dynamic involved and be also the fact that these people
[Amit Varma]: were considered subhuman. So it didn't, you know, they had no agency, and there was no
[Amit Varma]: trace of empathy in him, as you would expect for another human being, which is why decades
[Amit Varma]: later, when he's a renowned Nobel Prize winning poet, he actually writes about this openly
[Amit Varma]: without any trace of remorse in his autobiography, which which is just remarkably shocking. And
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, tells you so much about the man himself. I mean, one can't read his poetry
[Amit Varma]: in the same light after that. But it also illustrates what you were saying about the
[Amit Varma]: inequities of the caste system. And to some extent, those inequities being perpetuated
[Amit Varma]: or being made explicit by sort of the physical logistics of this outhouse outside and the
[Guest]: person who comes and collects human refuse before people wake up.
[Guest]: And you know, I mean, of course, the men are treated terribly, the women are always treated
[Guest]: worse, there is a very, very big problem of rape against by upper caste, I say upper caste
[Guest]: and lower caste, not because I think these are upper or lower caste, it's just, that's
[Guest]: the vocabulary use. But people who think that they're of an upper caste, there's a lot of
[Guest]: rape of Dalit women by people higher up in the power structure. But there's also a rape
[Guest]: problem with open defecation. Exactly. You know, women have to go outside at like 4-430
[Guest]: in the morning, it's dark, there is a lot of sexual abuse that happens because we haven't
[Guest]: provided even the most basic types of sanitation system so that women can be safe.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. And this is a point you'd recommended I read the superb book which I ended up doing
[Amit Varma]: called Where India Goes by Diane Coffey and Dean Spears. And they make pretty much the
[Amit Varma]: same points about open defecation and ritual purity that you've just explained.
[Guest]: And you know, that book is really fantastic, for multiple reasons, because the authors
[Guest]: never came to the subject, wanting to write about the caste system, they came to the subject
[Guest]: as health economists, right? They were trying to understand high levels of infant mortality
[Guest]: and just, you know, the health problems in these developing areas. And what they discovered
[Guest]: was, oh, there are all these toilets being built. But you would think people would just
[Guest]: jump at it. And it would be a superior alternative to open defecation. But it's actually an inferior
[Guest]: alternative to open defecation, because they live in a world where the caste system persists.
[Guest]: And they are not allowed to touch their own refuse. And if they do, then there are questions
[Guest]: about their purity, and they have polluted themselves and things like that. And what
[Guest]: I love about the book is, it places what is a development or an economic problem, beautifully
[Guest]: in the social context within which we are trying to solve that problem. So you can't
[Guest]: have solutions to these problems by ignoring what is the local or the social context, right?
[Guest]: The caste problem in UP, you don't have this problem in fishermen hamlets in Tamil Nadu.
[Guest]: They are perfectly fine. They have eliminated open defecation. And they don't have this
[Guest]: problem of ritual purity and things like that. They may have other caste issues, but this
[Guest]: is not one that is highly persistent among them. So I think we really need to think about
[Guest]: public health, public sanitation, in a very local contextual manner. And to that extent,
[Guest]: I would I would recommend everyone reads this book. It was my pick for the best book written
[Guest]: last year. The book is called Where India Goes. It's very accessible.
[Amit Varma]: It's a book called Where India Goes by Diane Coffey and Dean Spears. And there'll be a
[Amit Varma]: link to the Amazon page on it below the podcast. We'll take a quick commercial break, and then
[Amit Varma]: we'll come back to talk to move on from economics and the social issues of this and talk a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about the politics and the public choice angle.
[Unknown]: So it's going to be a great week on IBM. This week, we have a brand new podcast launching
[Unknown]: Wordy Wordpecker with Rachel Lopez. Every Tuesday, Rachel is going to break down fascinating
[Unknown]: words and why they mean what they mean. The show releases on the 21st of August. Be sure
[Unknown]: to check it out. And we have another new show launching as well. Know Your Kanun hosted
[Unknown]: by lawyer Ambar Rana where he addresses all law related questions and gives us insights
[Unknown]: into the legal system of India. On Cyrus Says this week, Cyrus chats with actor Kubra Seth
[Unknown]: about the experience of making sacred games, life, both the show and her body of work.
[Unknown]: On Colabra Cartel, we have Jeremy Buck and Sandeep Hathiramani, the experts behind the
[Unknown]: bar at Misty. They talk about the innovative cocktails they put on that menu. On the Vishal
[Unknown]: Gondal Show, Vishal speaks to Milind Devra about his interest in music, his vision for
[Unknown]: the country and a hell of a lot more. Coach Urmi talks to actor and model Sarah J. Dias
[Unknown]: about her fitness inspiration on the Kinetic Living podcast this week. And don't miss out
[Unknown]: on the final episode of Marvel's Lost and Found for this first season, Therapy 101 hosted
[Unknown]: by Zain and Avanti. Also guys, we're looking for a new producer, a social media intern
[Unknown]: and a graphic designer. If you are interested in working with IBM and it's a cool bunch
[Unknown]: of people to work with, please send us an email to jobs at Indusbox.com. Also, please
[Unknown]: make sure you're following us on social media. If you're not, we're IBM podcasts on Twitter,
[Unknown]: Facebook and Instagram.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm talking with Shruti Rajgopalan and we're discussing
[Amit Varma]: India Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, which achieved the very feel good, look nice kind of outcome
[Amit Varma]: of building a huge number of toilets across the country. And you would assume that that
[Amit Varma]: helped with solving our sanitation problems, which are also massive public health problems.
[Amit Varma]: Because as Shruti explained, open defecation leads to a public health crisis, it affects
[Amit Varma]: child mortality, kids actually dying much younger than they otherwise would. And it's
[Amit Varma]: a humanitarian issue. And you would think logically that if people don't have toilets
[Amit Varma]: in their home, you're building them toilets, that's surely great. But as Shruti pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, the unseen side of this is that with the toilet, you're just solving the last mile
[Amit Varma]: problem that show the guy can go to the toilet and do his job. But what happens after that?
[Amit Varma]: What happens with, let's say the refuse that he's left there, if you don't have a good
[Amit Varma]: waste disposal system, if you don't have a good sewage system, then that necessarily
[Amit Varma]: means that his refuse has to be cleaned either by himself or by somebody else. And that has
[Amit Varma]: led to a return of manual scavenging and some of the worst of the caste system as an unintended
[Amit Varma]: consequence. And therefore the answer lies in building sewage systems and waste disposal
[Amit Varma]: systems and the toilets will take care of themselves once the infrastructure is in place.
[Amit Varma]: Is that an accurate summation, Shruti?
[Guest]: Absolutely. I would also add one line that you know, we can also think about education,
[Guest]: educating people about the myths of all this ritual purity nonsense. So I would also support
[Guest]: educating people about the caste system and why, you know, manually pumping out or cleaning
[Guest]: out your latrine doesn't make you impure and actually protects your family better. So I
[Guest]: would say that is also a good way to go. But our education system is so badly broken, I'm
[Amit Varma]: not holding my breath.
[Amit Varma]: And even apart from that certain religious and traditional beliefs, whatever you call
[Amit Varma]: them, are often immune to education, because we are still a deeply superstitious society
[Amit Varma]: with all kinds of ludicrously irrational beliefs about everyday life.
[Guest]: Absolutely. And you know, of all the things, this is generally so unpleasant. I don't have
[Guest]: any of these ritual purity beliefs, right? But this is generally such an unpleasant area
[Guest]: that any excuse you can get to not have to touch feces is, you know, people are just
[Guest]: going to sort of jump on it. I'm just talking from a human nature perspective, right? No
[Guest]: one is very excited about manually pumping out a used latrine.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, I would say that, you know, invoking natural selection that a disgust towards feces
[Amit Varma]: is selected for because obviously, if you handle your own feces, you're likelier to
[Amit Varma]: fall ill and so on and so forth that affects your survival. So it's selected for its naturalist
[Amit Varma]: instinctive and there's nothing wrong with it. But the point is that if you just had
[Amit Varma]: a good waste disposable waste disposal system, you wouldn't need to touch your own feces
[Amit Varma]: or to get someone else to do it. You just pull the flush. And exactly.
[Guest]: And also a question of equipment and training and things like that, right? There are there
[Guest]: are many solutions between open defecation and a sophisticated sewage system that New
[Guest]: York City has. So there are many intermediate levels of waste management systems which require
[Guest]: resources and local context and training the, you know, municipality workers on how to use
[Guest]: them. And we don't have we don't pay any attention to any of those things.
[Amit Varma]: So we are 71 years past independence. Why haven't we done it yet? Like, let's not talk
[Amit Varma]: about this government or that government or Nehru versus Modi. It's been 71 years. Everyone's
[Amit Varma]: had a shot at it. Not much movement has happened. Why is that?
[Guest]: So the number one reason and you know, Amit, you and I have spoken about this personally
[Guest]: and also on the podcast. The number one reason is we, until very recently, did not have a
[Guest]: functional layer of local government. These are problems that are meant to be resolved
[Guest]: by the local government. You can't have the central government trying to figure out that
[Guest]: in the south bungalow area, you know, do we need to build a new sewage system or extend
[Guest]: the pipeline for the new building to be connected? These are local problems. They need local
[Guest]: solutions. We didn't have local government. That is a very, very big part of the problem
[Guest]: and extremely underappreciated, especially in rural areas. Now, we've had a local government
[Guest]: system for about 25 years. We just celebrated the 25th anniversary of, you know, the panchayati
[Guest]: raj and urban local body, the constitutional amendments, which were the 73rd and 74th amendment.
[Guest]: So we created a layer of local government, but we didn't give them any responsibility,
[Guest]: nor did we give them any revenue raising authority. You and I have done a podcast on this before.
[Guest]: So basically, you have local governments today, but they have no budgets, right? And the state
[Guest]: government has just held on to power and revenue, and they haven't devolved responsibility or
[Guest]: the budgets to these local governments. So I would say the number one blame sort of I
[Guest]: would place on why we don't have good local public sanitation systems is because we never
[Guest]: had good local government, we never invested in that layer of government.
[Amit Varma]: So we've done a podcast on this earlier, which is one of my favourite episodes. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: it's an episode on urban governance, if you just go to seen unseen.in, you can find that
[Amit Varma]: in the archival episodes, I don't remember the episode number. But let me quickly try
[Amit Varma]: and sum up the sort of insights that you gave us in that episode, where your whole point
[Amit Varma]: was that when it comes to local governance, urban or otherwise, there is a disconnect
[Amit Varma]: between power and accountability, who's accountable to us, your local corporator, and so on, they're
[Amit Varma]: all accountable to you, you vote for them, they depend on your votes to get get to office.
[Amit Varma]: But who has a power over you, these guys don't really have much power, because local government
[Amit Varma]: in our constitution and in our system, simply hasn't been given that much power, all the
[Amit Varma]: power is really with the state government. And when it comes to, for example, a city
[Amit Varma]: like Mumbai, the state government is not so accountable to you, because it depend more
[Amit Varma]: on rural votes or votes from outside the city, and on different constituencies, like there'll
[Amit Varma]: be a constituency of farmers, and so on and so forth. And when you have local problems
[Amit Varma]: that need to be solved, the person who is accountable to you doesn't have the power
[Amit Varma]: to solve them. And the people who do have the power and the budgets to affect your lives
[Amit Varma]: don't care about you, because your vote doesn't matter to them. Is that an accurate summation?
[Guest]: That's an accurate summation. I would also add one one last point, which is, you know,
[Guest]: you live in Andheri. Andheri doesn't have much of an open defecation problem, as far
[Guest]: as I know. It has other problems, garbage collection, poor sidewalks, you know, those
[Guest]: kinds of problems. So if you were to now talk about open defecation, maybe that's a problem
[Guest]: in rural Maharashtra. It's very difficult for people like Amit living in Andheri to
[Guest]: coordinate with people in rural Maharashtra and put together a platform when their local
[Guest]: problems are so different. They are going to be asking for really basic things, right?
[Guest]: Like how can we secure a well, and you are asking for far more sophisticated things.
[Guest]: So not only does your vote matter less at the state level, it's far more difficult and
[Guest]: far less likely to organize different groups because they have very different local problems
[Amit Varma]: which are highly contextual.
[Amit Varma]: So the ideal system of government, therefore, is obviously as local as possible. And we
[Amit Varma]: are planning to do an episode on Panchayati Raj. So, you know, watch out for that in the
[Amit Varma]: coming weeks. But the ideal government is as local as possible. So people within an
[Amit Varma]: area know what their immediate concerns are, and they can make sure that their government,
[Amit Varma]: which is accountable to them, will actually do those things. And for that, they need to
[Amit Varma]: have the power to do those things. And that power has never been devolved to local governments
[Amit Varma]: at all, because the central and the state governments, obviously, anybody who has power
[Amit Varma]: is hesitant to give away a part of it.
[Guest]: Exactly. So in one sense, you know, Prime Minister Modi and his team, which is running
[Guest]: the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, they are definitely quite sensible. They know that they can't
[Guest]: build waste management systems. So they say we'll build toilets instead. Right. So they
[Guest]: are actually quite sensible in that they are trying to solve the problem that you can actually
[Guest]: implement at the central level. So to that extent, the program is an enormous success.
[Guest]: But the program is an enormous failure if the goal is actually public sanitation and
[Guest]: public health. Right. Because it's never going to solve it unless you have local partners
[Guest]: who can help convert this network of latrines into a sensible waste management system. So
[Guest]: that is really the core of the conundrum that the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan poses. It's a great
[Guest]: idea. It's important to solve the last mile problem. But you have to solve the last mile
[Guest]: problem last. And you can't ask PM Modi to solve the initial first hundred mile problem
[Guest]: because it simply can't be done at the centralized level. It has to be devolved to the local
[Amit Varma]: level.
[Amit Varma]: I'll both back you up and take a cynical view of that. My criticism of the Modi government
[Amit Varma]: right from 2014 is that they have never got into governance mode. They have continued
[Amit Varma]: in campaigning mode, which they are incredibly good at. And pretty much everything they do
[Amit Varma]: at the level of governance is for the sake of optics. So even in the Swachh Bharat campaign,
[Amit Varma]: is great optics that, hey, we've built so many million toilets and it looks great and
[Amit Varma]: you can declare it a success. But they don't really care beyond that, which I think is
[Amit Varma]: a cross against them. At the same time, I'll agree with you and say that as far as solving
[Amit Varma]: the deeper problem of public sanitation is concerned, that yes, the central government
[Amit Varma]: can't really do much, you're spot on about that. But at the same time, the central government
[Amit Varma]: could accept the structural problem, which is preventing that the whole issue that local
[Amit Varma]: governments don't have enough power, or enough power hasn't devolved down to local governments,
[Amit Varma]: and do something about solving that structural problem, which is not something I see either.
[Guest]: Absolutely. There, I must agree with you both the central and the state level. And here
[Guest]: I pose even more emphasis on state level legislatures and executive, which is they really need to
[Guest]: get their act together and recognize that local governance problems can never be resolved
[Guest]: at that level of centrality. And you know, Indian states are larger than most European
[Guest]: and Latin American countries in terms of size and population. So even at the state level,
[Guest]: it's like trying to build a, you know, a sewage system for Brazil, or Germany. So it's not
[Guest]: like the state level is some chota level in India, right? It's still a very, very complex
[Guest]: system with very large area and very large population and diversity in population, lots
[Guest]: and lots of local issues. So I think there needs to be a recognition of this in India,
[Guest]: that the level of complexity that the Indian polity poses, and I don't see any of that
[Guest]: at the central or the state level at this point in terms of devolution.
[Amit Varma]: And another thing that we don't see and explain to me why that is so, is that normally you
[Amit Varma]: would imagine that when there is such a far reaching problem of public health, when you
[Amit Varma]: know, babies die younger than they need to, when, you know, it's a humanitarian crisis
[Amit Varma]: in a manner of speaking that's continued on for more than seven decades, you would imagine
[Amit Varma]: that citizens would take a stand and they would be constant more chars and her nose
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth till something is done about it. But even citizens don't seem to
[Guest]: excuse the phrasing give a shit about this. So, you know, I find citizen apathy is very
[Guest]: contextual. You know, my parents recently moved to a condo building in Noida, you know,
[Guest]: it's all the typical things you would associate with a middle class or an upper middle class
[Guest]: condo society, right? It's got all these buildings and they have a whole co-op and a voting system
[Guest]: where, you know, all the people get together and they raise their voice over daily issues.
[Guest]: When I go to one of those meetings, it's like my blood pressure goes up. People are so passionate
[Guest]: about, you know, should this be the entry gate and the exit gate or only the entry gate,
[Guest]: right? How many speed breakers should we have in front of which of the buildings should
[Guest]: you have the speed breaker so that, you know, children are not faced with the fast traffic
[Guest]: coming in and outside the parking garage? Should you have a water desalination plant?
[Guest]: Because that's a big problem in Noida. People are deeply passionate, like deeply passionate.
[Guest]: They shout, they yell, they politic, they, you know, have parties with other association
[Guest]: members where they say, this is Noida, they probably murder as well. Yeah. So this is
[Guest]: incredible. And when I think about why isn't it that these people are doing this with the
[Guest]: Noida Municipal Corporation, they're like upper middle class people who don't even go
[Guest]: to vote. It's because they pay condo association fees. And the condo president lives next door,
[Guest]: right? And the whole board membership lives next door. So if your governance problems
[Guest]: aren't solved, you just pick up the phone and go badmouth them. And if they are solved,
[Guest]: then you host a dinner party for them. Right. And you pay your fees. There's a huge link
[Guest]: between what you pay and what you get. The feedback mechanisms are very tight at the
[Guest]: local level. Right. So I think we need to put citizen apathy in context. Of course,
[Guest]: there is citizen apathy in Andheri. No one knows the name of the municipal corporator
[Guest]: because no one has to, because he can never solve these problems or she can never solve
[Guest]: these problems. Whereas the president of the condo association in Noida can and does.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, the residents of the condo association in Noida, what they are
[Amit Varma]: doing is simply they're demanding a bank for their buck, they pay those fees, they want
[Amit Varma]: those services. And yet somehow at the level of the citizen, we seem to have this, we disassociated
[Amit Varma]: ourselves from the fact that we also pay a constant cost for government and yet we don't
[Amit Varma]: demand enough in return. We take taxes for granted, even though they are coercive and
[Amit Varma]: mostly highly unfair. And we don't get any bank for our buck. And also we take the government
[Amit Varma]: for granted. And we assume that, you know, we behave essentially like subjects that whatever
[Amit Varma]: is done for us, you know, it's great, it's a bonus. But otherwise, we don't stand up
[Guest]: and demand our rights enough. But even there, Amit, there's a centralization problem. You
[Guest]: don't know who you're paying tax to, you don't know where it's going. There is a Swachh Bharat
[Guest]: cess that goes to the central government, right? If your local municipal corporator
[Guest]: and the local municipal body had the authority to levy taxes and raise taxes, you will also
[Guest]: be marching in Nandheri. Or if not you, a bunch of other people, right? Saying, dude,
[Guest]: you raised our local taxes, and you didn't clean the garbage. So you really need to think
[Guest]: small at this level. Right. And so,
[Amit Varma]: your point is that the apathy is rational, because we know that we can't do anything
[Amit Varma]: anywhere. Protest is pointless. So people we can protest to are powerless to do anything
[Amit Varma]: about it. And your argument is that we would be less apathetic if the structure of government
[Amit Varma]: changed.
[Guest]: Exactly. So I don't see this level of apathy. I mean, look at Indians on Twitter, look at
[Guest]: Indians at their dinner parties, look at Indians at their condo association meetings, they
[Guest]: don't come across as apathetic. In fact, you know, the Amartya Sen version of the Indian,
[Guest]: the argumentative Indian, that is a much more fitting description, because we discuss, we
[Guest]: fight, right, passionately, emotionally.
[Amit Varma]: On Twitter, you don't have the argumentative Indian, you have the abusive Indian or the
[Amit Varma]: virtue signaling Indian.
[Guest]: You have all sorts of Indians, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's very hard to find a good argument.
[Guest]: But what I mean is, it is not a, it's not fundamentally, we're not culturally apathetic,
[Guest]: that Indians are apathetic. I think it's contextual, you're apathetic when you know that your voice
[Guest]: will not be heard, and there is going to be no feedback coming from the other side. So
[Guest]: you try once or twice, and then you give up. And when your voice can be heard, you do use
[Guest]: your voice and you do demand change. So I think we really need to think about structure
[Guest]: of government and, you know, just better systems of local governance. And, you know, at the
[Guest]: local level, you can also experiment more, right? Andheri East and Andheri West are large
[Guest]: enough that you can have two different kinds of local governments, and then you can see
[Guest]: which one worked better. So you can have more experimentation, you can have a greater level
[Guest]: of addressing the local problem in the local context, you can experiment with tax rates,
[Guest]: right? You have far more competition, political competition at the local level. And we have
[Guest]: basically not capitalized on this incredibly important political mechanism.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Andheri West and Andheri East together have more than four times the population of
[Amit Varma]: Iceland. I pointed this out recently after Iceland held Argentina to a draw, I think
[Guest]: it was on Twitter. Yeah, not even half as good a football team. Yeah, no, no, I didn't
[Amit Varma]: even mention that. I just said to put it into perspective, Iceland has less than a quarter
[Amit Varma]: of the population of Andheri. And these words were meant as praise for Iceland to put their
[Amit Varma]: achievement in context. And instead, everybody assumed I was being anti national and dissing
[Amit Varma]: India and I got hugely trolled for it. So not the argumentative Indian, but the abusive
[Amit Varma]: Indian. But sort of go back to the sort of the public choice question of that and I won't
[Amit Varma]: ask you to spend much time on this because we discussed it in our episode on urban governance
[Amit Varma]: already. But for listeners who might not have heard that, how can this be mitigated? Like,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, then the solution is clear that you need more power to devolve to local government
[Amit Varma]: so that your local representative actually has the power to do anything, has actually
[Amit Varma]: the power to do what her constituents desire. But is this ever likely to happen? Because
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that those who have that centralized power are never going to give any of it up.
[Amit Varma]: How can those incentives change?
[Guest]: I definitely think one thing that's going to happen is the switch from, you know, right
[Guest]: now, urban issues are not addressed at all. And rural issues are much more on the on the
[Guest]: table for state legislatures. But that said, this is a rural issue as well. But this is
[Guest]: a universal issue.
[Guest]: Absolutely. But what I mean is, I do see a switch happening, that state governments will
[Guest]: recognize urban problems a little bit more than they did before. Now, having said that,
[Guest]: I don't see any incentive for them to devolve power. I think what needs to happen, I think
[Guest]: the impetus has to come from a few great women and men. You know, just so the constitution
[Guest]: leaves the option open to devolve power, right? It doesn't stop you from doing it, but it
[Guest]: doesn't make it mandatory. So there is the question of, I think we need some good state
[Guest]: chief ministers who say, you know what, we're going to devolve these four areas to local
[Guest]: government, and then let's see how it plays out. Because there's nothing constitutionally
[Guest]: preventing them from doing so. So I do think we need some good show of leadership at the
[Guest]: state government level. And frankly, we've had a great run with, you know, I mean, we
[Guest]: have a wide variation in quality of chief ministers. But we've also had good ones, you
[Guest]: know, not just bad ones. You had states where you actually had better local governance,
[Guest]: right? Kerala is an example. Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, the southern states are much better on local
[Guest]: governance than the northern states are. So you do have some good examples where obviously
[Guest]: the states either invested in local governance even before the 73rd, 74th amendment, or at
[Guest]: the very least embraced this idea that you need to devolve power. I think what states
[Guest]: are not doing is devolving revenue raising authority. I really think one important thing
[Guest]: to do is bring property taxes under GST. But like you have central and state GST, that
[Guest]: should be local GST, that should not go to the state. Right? So it's the same system.
[Guest]: It's just, you know, the same tax rate, but it's who, which is the agency that actually
[Guest]: ends up collecting or getting that revenue. So I think we need to get into a system of
[Guest]: good property taxes, because property taxes are local. People invest in that local area,
[Guest]: and property owners will then demand the bank for their buck, and their vote and their tax
[Guest]: payment will be linked to the same person. Right now, our vote and our tax payment go
[Guest]: to completely different groups. So I really think that is an important step. So, you know,
[Guest]: maybe the GST could also solve this problem by bringing in property taxes under its fold
[Guest]: and implementing it at the local government level. Now, you can imagine the biggest opposition
[Guest]: to this is state governments, because they lose potential revenue, and they also lose
[Guest]: authority. So they are really what is the, you know, the big interest group, which is
[Guest]: blocking this kind of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And at some level, you know, I tend to be a little sceptical of this whole notion of
[Amit Varma]: relying on say benevolent or enlightened chief ministers to make the changes that are necessary
[Amit Varma]: because the constitution allows them to. But the fact is that the incentives are against
[Amit Varma]: state and humans react to incentives and something you keep going on and on about and that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if they just do what the incentives dictate that they will do this will never
[Amit Varma]: get done. So,
[Guest]: Fair enough, but you know, I also think that there are multiple incentives in politics,
[Guest]: right? So of course, there are the incentives of, you know, protecting your turf and getting
[Guest]: revenue and getting reelected. But I do think a lot of politicians are also interested in
[Guest]: being remembered. They're interested in, you know, entering the history books. I think
[Guest]: their incentives are much more complex. So I agree with you that there is this whole
[Guest]: public choice thing, and we can't just rely on people's benevolence. But I'm not saying
[Guest]: we should rely on their benevolence. I'm just saying they could have multi dimensions to
[Guest]: how they think they want to be perceived or remembered or reelected. And to that extent,
[Guest]: for some of them, it might be very much in line with devolving power or experimenting
[Guest]: with new, you know, new sort of governance ideas and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And at the local level, even assuming that they were to devolve power, an interesting
[Amit Varma]: point you made earlier when we were chatting about the subject on building a waste management
[Amit Varma]: system is that while the benefits are diffused, the costs are actually concentrated and a
[Amit Varma]: few people feel the brunt of it to begin with, which is, again, a reason for opposition against
[Amit Varma]: it. Can you elaborate on that a bit?
[Guest]: Absolutely. So you know, there is, I mean, even once you resolve the problem and devolve
[Guest]: power to the local level, there is a current mismatch between the costs and benefits, right?
[Guest]: So when I go to a store and I buy an apple, I pay the cost for the apple and I get the
[Guest]: benefits of the apple, right? So the costs and benefits are perfectly aligned. Now, in
[Guest]: politics, that's not always the case. And it's really not the case in this particular
[Guest]: instance. So if you need to build a waste management system, it doesn't happen overnight,
[Guest]: right? So in a place like Andheri, if you had to expand the existing sewage system to
[Guest]: accommodate the population growth and the migration, you need to dig up all the roads.
[Guest]: Now, I have been to Andheri and I have driven there in traffic and it's already a nightmare.
[Guest]: You know, when the metro and things were being built, it was just a nightmare to navigate
[Guest]: the streets of Andheri. So now you have a situation where all the costs are imposed
[Guest]: in the present, right? All the roads are dug up right now. All the benefits come in the
[Guest]: future. Babies 10 years from today will have, you know, low levels of infant mortality,
[Guest]: low levels of vulnerability to public health problems. And those babies will work 20 years
[Guest]: after that, right? 18 years after that. So the benefits are far in the future. The beneficiary,
[Guest]: some of them haven't even been born or are not even in the system yet. All the costs
[Guest]: are upfront today being faced by people who need to get to work fast and things like that.
[Guest]: So it's obviously a very big problem of, yeah, we would love a sewage system, but we don't
[Guest]: want our street to be dug up, right? In rural areas, there is also a caste dimension to
[Guest]: the problem. They'll be like, you know, the sewage system can't go behind my house. It
[Guest]: can't go under my Tulsi plant, right? There are all those dimensions also to think of.
[Guest]: So there is a lot of opposition to spending the money and the time that needs to be devoted
[Guest]: to building a waste management system because it involves some kind of disturbance of current
[Guest]: infrastructure. So all the costs are in the present, all the benefits are in the future.
[Guest]: The second problem is all the benefits are dispersed and all the costs are concentrated.
[Guest]: So the benefits are dispersed in the sense that all of us benefit if there is a better
[Guest]: public waste management system because it leads to better public sanitation and therefore
[Guest]: better public health, right? All of us benefit if babies are not dying under the age of one.
[Guest]: So and all of us also benefit if the groundwater is not polluted because we also access it.
[Guest]: So on and so forth. However, all the costs politically are taken on by the state chief
[Guest]: minister or the local corporator who are implementing the system right now. Because when everything
[Guest]: is dug up, people will protest, they will vote them out, right? And the benefits will
[Guest]: be reaped by the municipal corporator or the legislator three terms down. Because that's
[Guest]: when we really saw, oh, I know we suffered through all the dug up roads, but how wonderful
[Guest]: it is to have a really functional clean environment. So this problem of dispersed benefits and
[Guest]: concentrated costs and benefits in the future, and costs in the present, this creates a very
[Guest]: big problem. When we are talking about how do we overcome the interest and actually build
[Amit Varma]: waste management systems. So another way of putting this would be that the benefits are
[Amit Varma]: unseen and the costs are seen. For example, the guy whose infant daughter could be safe
[Amit Varma]: from an early death 10 years later, because of a good sewage system today, he can't possibly
[Amit Varma]: see that now, what he can see is that it's taking him half an hour longer to get to work
[Amit Varma]: because the roads are dug up and so on and so forth. All the inconveniences are obvious,
[Amit Varma]: which then leads us to the pessimistic conclusion that even if the structural problems of local
[Amit Varma]: governance, the sort of the de-linking between votes and money were solved, you would still
[Amit Varma]: have this problem getting in the way.
[Guest]: No, but you know, it can be I think you still have a better shot at solving it at the local
[Guest]: level. So right now, if you think about it, we don't have very good charismatic leaders
[Guest]: at the local government level. Why? Because there is not much for them to do. And they
[Guest]: don't have much revenue raising authority or responsibility. If you actually build a
[Guest]: sensible structural system, where local governments become important, then you're going to have
[Guest]: really charismatic people who come in to the local government system and can actually explain
[Guest]: to the people that, hey, I know it feels like a giant problem today, but there will be a
[Guest]: benefit from it. I think Prime Minister Modi is fantastic at this. Look at the rhetoric
[Guest]: he built around demonetization. I don't personally support demonetization. But look at how he
[Guest]: managed to convince 1.25 billion people that I know it is hugely costly and you're standing
[Guest]: in line, but this is going to be hugely beneficial to the country and we request you to make
[Guest]: this sacrifice. And people fell hook, line and sinker. Right. We shouldn't underestimate
[Guest]: the importance of leaders being able to communicate the value of a good project or in the case
[Guest]: of demonetization, a terrible project. Right. So I really think if we switch the attention
[Guest]: to the local level, you will get people who manage to overcome these problems simply through
[Guest]: better communication. Have you noticed when there are new buildings being built in Mumbai?
[Guest]: What happens is they have these huge holdings of how the building will look in the future.
[Guest]: Right. So all you see is like this awful structure, but you see this beautiful photograph of kids
[Guest]: playing in a shining swimming pool and all that. You have entrepreneurs who are able
[Guest]: to project in the future to help you imagine what you can't imagine yourself. Right. And
[Guest]: I don't see why you can't have that politics. I just don't think anyone has the incentive
[Guest]: right now to put in that kind of effort and to engage in that kind of entrepreneurship
[Guest]: because nothing is it's not possible to solve anything at the local level. But I do think
[Guest]: if you had a good structure of local government with good authority, I mean, in New York,
[Guest]: Bloomberg ran for mayor. Right. Exactly. There was there was an important job there to be
[Guest]: done, which came with responsibility, which came with power, which came with a certain
[Guest]: reputation. And he didn't run for the Senate. He ran to be the mayor of New York City. And
[Guest]: I don't see why that wouldn't happen if you devolved power and authority and revenue raising
[Guest]: capabilities in India. I do think that can happen. And I think you will see very creative
[Guest]: political solutions on they won't be uniform, but creative political solutions on how to
[Amit Varma]: solve these problems. I buy your point, though I disagree with your example. I buy your point
[Amit Varma]: that if there is a more meaningful role for local government to play, then better leaders
[Amit Varma]: will emerge, especially people who've experienced problems firsthand, like waste management
[Amit Varma]: or traffic or potholes or whatever, who will then say, hey, I can finally do something
[Amit Varma]: about this because local government has a power. Let me go out there and do something
[Amit Varma]: and you know, like in the housing society where your parents stay in Noida, people will
[Amit Varma]: get similarly involved here. So by that point, I don't quite agree with the example of Modi.
[Amit Varma]: I think this country has suffered too much because he places rhetoric above actual governance.
[Guest]: But I understand the sense in which you think it's a good thing in that case. But what I
[Guest]: mean is, we do have an example of a political leader who has told people that there is value
[Guest]: in their sacrifice. That's not an easy message to sell, if you really think about it, right,
[Guest]: selling to people that, hey, I know you're waiting four hours in line outside the ATM
[Guest]: and the bank, but it's all for a great cause. And people did it, right? No rioting. That's
[Guest]: the part I want to focus on. Not that demonetization was a good idea, or Modi did a great service
[Guest]: to India by engaging in that kind of rhetoric. But what I mean is, it can be done. And if
[Guest]: it can be done for a bad idea, I don't see why we can't do it for a good idea, like building
[Amit Varma]: a waste management system.
[Amit Varma]: On that optimistic note, Shruti, thanks a lot for coming on the scene in the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: As usual, I learned a lot from you today.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit. It was a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do check out all the related links of the
[Amit Varma]: essays and books that we mentioned during the show on the episodes page on either seenunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: or thinkpragati.com. You can follow Shruti on Twitter at S Rajgopalan. And you can follow
[Amit Varma]: me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Hello, I'm Chuck. I'm Srikip. I'm Naren. And together we are the hosts of the podcast Simplified.
[Unknown]: And we are going to be doing a hundredth episode, which is going to be a live episode at Doolali
[Unknown]: in Khar, in Mumbai on the 25th of August, 2018.
[Unknown]: Yes, we should get the year right.
[Unknown]: We're going to be doing a lot of fun things at the show. We're going to be talking about
[Unknown]: some stuff, simplifying them. We're going to have a very erudite guest who's going to
[Unknown]: hopefully make up for our silliness, but we sincerely doubt it.
[Unknown]: And there's definitely going to be a lot of beer. So we really hope you join us.
[Unknown]: It'll be fun. And it'll be more fun if you guys are there. So do line up.
[Unknown]: See you. Bye-bye.
[Unknown]: Some time ago, five successful restauranteurs came together to form the Colaba Cartel.
[Unknown]: The founders of the table, Gauri Devi Dayal and Jay Yousuf, partnered with the founders
[Unknown]: of Woodside Inn, Abhishek Honavar, Pankil Shah and Sumit Gambhir to open a new restaurant
[Unknown]: in Colaba.
[Unknown]: If you've ever dreamed of opening a restaurant or love eating out, you want to listen in.
[Unknown]: The Colaba Cartel.
[Unknown]: This exclusive 10-part series is hosted by Gauri Devi Dayal and Amit Doshi.